Add cnns (#223)
johko/computer-vision-course: chapters/en/Unit 2 - Convolutional Neural Networks/introduction.mdx

# Introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks

## Convolution: Basic Ideas

Convolution is an operation used to extract features from data. This can be 1D, 2D or 3D. We'll  explain the operation with a solid example. All you need to know now is that the operation simply takes a matrix made of numbers, moves it through the data, and takes the sum of products between the data and that matrix. This matrix is called kernel or filter. You might say, "What does it have to do with the feature extraction, and how am I supposed to apply it?
Don’t panic! We’re getting to it.

To illustrate the intuition, let's take a look at this example. We have this 1D data, and we visualize it.

> ![Kernel Image](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/kernel_image.png)

Reviewer: Ok, I see later in the article that this is helpful, but at this point it may be confusing. I would suggest either adding a comment here why the visualization will later be useful, or you can remove the visualization here and only show it later.

![1D Conv Multiplication](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/1d_conv_multiplication.png)
We will repeat it until the right element of the kernel touches every element, which yields the below result.

![1D Conv Result](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/1d_conv_result.png)

Notice anything? The filter gives the rate of change in the data (the derivatives!). This is one characteristic we could extract from our data. Let’s visualize it.

![Convolved Illustrated](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/convolved_illustrated.png)

The convolved data (the result of the convolution) is called a feature map. And it makes sense, as it shows the features we can extract, the characteristics related to the data, and the rate of change.

This is exactly what edge detection filters do! Let’s see it in 2-dimensional data. This time, our kernel will be different. It will be a 3x3 kernel (just so you know it could’ve been a 2x2 too).
![2D Conv ](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/2d_conv.png)

> This filter is actually quite famous, but we won’t spoil it for you now :). The previous filter was [-1 1]. Meanwhile, this one is [-1 0 1]. It’s just 3x3 and nothing different, it gives changes on the horizontal axis. Let’s see an example and apply convolution. Below is our 2D data.

Reviewer: What do you mean by "it gives changes"?

![2D Conv Matrix](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/2d_conv_matrix.png)

Think of this as an image, and we want to extract the horizontal changes. Now, the center of the filter has to touch every single pixel, so we pad the image.

![Padding](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/padding.png)

The feature map will be the same size as the original data. The result of the convolution will be written to the same position that the center of the kernel touched in the original matrix, meaning, for this one, it will touch the leftmost and the top positions.

![2d_conv_illustrated](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/2d_conv_illustrated.png)

If we keep applying the convolution, we get the following feature map.

![2D Feature Map](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/2d_feature_map.png)

Which shows us the horizontal changes (the edges). This filter is actually called the Prewitt Filter.

![Prewitt Sobel](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/prewitt_sobel.png)

> You can flip the Prewitt filter to get the changes in vertical direction. The Sobel filter is another famous filter for edge detection.

Reviewer: It might be a good idea to add links to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prewitt_operator and https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sobel_operator

## Convolutional Neural Networks

Fine, but what does it have to do with deep learning? Well, brute forcing filters to extract features does not work well with every image. We could somehow find the optimal filters to extract important information or even detect objects in the images. That’s where convolutional neural networks come into play. We convolve images with various filters, and these pixels in the feature maps will eventually become the parameters that we will optimize, and in the end, we will find the best filters for our problem.

The idea is, that we will use filters to extract information. We will randomly initialize multiple filters, create our feature maps, feed them to a classifier, and do backpropagation. Before diving into it, I’d like to introduce you to something we call “pooling”.

> As you can see above, there are many pixels that show the change in the feature map. To know that there’s an edge, we only need to see that there’s a change (an edge, a corner, anything), and that’s it. In the above example, we could have got only one of the two, and that would be enough. This way, we would store fewer parameters and still have the features. This operation of getting the most important element in the feature map is called pooling. With pooling, we lose the exact pixel location of where there’s an edge but we store fewer parameters. Also, this way, our feature extraction mechanism will be more robust to small changes, e.g., we only need to know that there are two eyes, a nose, and a mouth to know that there’s a face in an image, the distance between those elements and the size of those elements tend to change from face to face, and pooling enables the model to be more robust against these changes. Another good thing about pooling is that it helps us handle varying input sizes. We’d like you to watch this video to gain a better intuition. Below is the max pooling operation, where every four pixels, we get the maximum pixel. There are various types of pooling, e.g., average pooling, weighted pooling, or L2 pooling.

Reviewer: "In the above example, we could have got only one of the two, and that would be enough." - which example? And one of the two what? The sentence is a bit unclear.

Reviewer: This sentence "There are various types of pooling, e.g., average pooling, weighted pooling, or L2 pooling." would make more sense after the max_pooling image.

![Max Pooling](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/max_pooling.png)

> Let’s get to the architecture. We will use a Keras example (for the sake of illustration) and we will walk you through what’s happening. Below is our model (again, don’t panic, we will walk you through what’s happening).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s build a simple CNN architecture. We will use a Keras example (for the sake of illustration) and we will walk you through what’s happening. Below is our model (again, don’t panic, we will walk you through what’s happening).
```

dropout (Dropout)            (None, 1600)              0         
_________________________________________________________________
dense (Dense)                (None, 10)                16010     
=================================================================
Total params: 34,826
Trainable params: 34,826
Non-trainable params: 0
_________________________________________________________________
```
Convolutional neural networks start with an input layer and a convolutional layer. Keras Conv2D layers take a number of kernels and the size of the kernel as parameters. What’s happening is illustrated below. Here, we convolve the image with 32 kernels and end up with 32 feature maps, each having the size of the image.

![Network Illustration](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/network_illustration.png)

After convolutional layers, we put a max pooling layer to reduce the number of parameters stored and make the model robust to the changes, as discussed above. This will reduce the number of parameters calculated.

![Network Illustration 2](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/network_illustration_2.png)

> Then, these feature maps are concatenated together and are flattened.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, these feature maps are concatenated together and flattened.
```

![Network Illustration](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/network_illustration.png)

After convolutional layers, we put a max pooling layer to reduce the number of parameters stored and make the model robust to the changes, as discussed above. This will reduce the number of parameters calculated.

![Network Illustration 2](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/network_illustration_2.png)

Then, these feature maps are concatenated together and are flattened.

![Network Illustration 3](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/CNNs/network_illustration_3.png)

Later on, we use something called dropout to drop a portion of parameters to avoid overfitting. Finally, the final form of weights will go through a dense layer for the classification part to finally get classified and backpropagation will take place.

### Backpropagation in Convolutional Neural Networks in Theory

> How does the backpropagation work here? We want to optimize for the best kernel values here, so they’re our weights. In the end, we expect the classifier to figure out the relationship between pixel values, kernels, and classes: we have a very long flattened array consisting of elements that consist of pooled and activated versions of pixels convolved with initial weights (kernel elements), and we update those weights such that we answer the question “which kernels should I apply to make a distinction between cat and a dog photo?”. So the point of training CNNs is to come up with the optimal kernels, and these are found thanks to backpropagation. Prior to CNNs, people would try to try a lot of filters on an image to extract features themselves, meanwhile most generic filters (as we’ve seen above, e.g., Prewitt or Sobel) do not necessarily need to work for all images given images can be very different, even in the same dataset. This is why CNNs outperform traditional image processing techniques.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How does the backpropagation work here? We want to optimize for the best kernel values here, so they’re our weights. In the end, we expect the classifier to figure out the relationship between pixel values, kernels, and classes. Thus, we have a very long flattened array consisting of elements that are pooled and activated versions of pixels convolved with initial weights (the kernel elements). We update those weights such that we answer the question “which kernels should I apply to make a distinction between cat and a dog photo?”. The point of training CNNs is to come up with the optimal kernels, and these are found using backpropagation. Prior to CNNs, people would try to try a lot of filters on an image to extract features themselves, meanwhile most generic filters (as we’ve seen above, e.g., Prewitt or Sobel) do not necessarily work for all images given images can be very different, even in the same dataset. This is why CNNs outperform traditional image processing techniques.
```

There are a couple of advantages by means of storage when we use convolutional neural networks.

### Parameter sharing

> In convolutional neural networks, we convolve with the same filter across all pixels and all images which provides an advantage over storing parameters, this is much more efficient than going through an image with a dense neural network. This is called “weight tying” and those weights are called “tied weights”. This is also seen in autoencoders.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In convolutional neural networks, we convolve with the same filter across all pixels, all channels, and all images which provides an advantage over storing parameters, this is much more efficient than going through an image with a dense neural network. This is called “weight tying” and those weights are called “tied weights”. This is also seen in autoencoders.
```
Very small suggestion, when I first learned about CNN's I found it helpful to ground my understanding in the efficiency of weight typing in the fact that you could apply the filter to multiple channels, just a personal small recommendation :)
